okay so i chose the title of this one
for obvious reasons things with rings
and we would naturally start with this
magnificent view
of the rings of saturn here
it's also quite a magnificent view of
the body of the planet i would say
with the pastel shades that you get in
the cloud tops of saturn they're showing
very nicely
and you can begin to see just
some of the structure within the rings
and how it is really rather more
complicated
than it perhaps first appeared to the
early observers and even
in the time of um patrick moore's books
from the 1960s and 70s
they he talked about saturn having three
rings
which clearly is not quite right
so of course we go right back to that
man galileo
and 1610 he was the first person to
use a telescope to look at anything in
the sky
and when he observed saturn for the
first time
he thought there was something very
curious about it he either
thought that it had handles like
two handles on a jug or a mug
sticking out the side or he wasn't sure
if
it was an optical illusion and maybe it
was accompanied by two
enormous moons as in the upper diagram
there
that were being blurred out and kind of
merged with the planet by
his relatively poor optics
two years later he had a look and they
vanished
um and that was quite a surprise
so what was going on
what what was going on were there these
two round companions
did it have handles sticking out the
side who knows
it took a little bit longer before
telescopes improved
to the stage where people were beginning
to
see in enough detail to work out that uh
they were in fact rings and
1657 christopher wren the architect
but who was also professor of astronomy
at gresham college
in london uh wrote in a pamphlet
suggesting that
uh the planet was surrounded by a ring
but it didn't real know whether it was
independent
of the planet or physically attached to
it
christian huygens then came along and
suggested the same idea
and wren pulled his publication because
uh huygens just scooped him to beat him
to the
getting the thing out and robert hook
another famous
polymath of the time he of hook's law of
elasticity
uh also noted that the shadow of the
ring
was landing on uh sorry the shadow of
the planet was landing on the ring
which was a clue to the 3d structure
that it was in fact a ring
with a sphere in the center
so they were beginning to get an
understanding of of the
shape of the rings in the geometry
but what about the structure well we now
know that they are made of
millions and millions of what you might
describe as dirty snowballs
small specks of dust and
ice through to large lumps some the size
of a car
is often the description for the the
larger ones they say
but literally millions of them all
orbiting rounds
saturn independently now patrick's books
would have talked about there being
three rings the a and b
ring and the c or crepe ring
innermost to them much darker and
dustier
and harder to spot so normally when you
observe saturn through
a small telescope you see the a and the
b ring together
are slightly different colors and
slightly different brightnesses
and separated by the cassini division
it's dark gap that you can see in the
diagram there
and spotting the cratering the c-ring
with amateur
telescopes is really quite difficult
but even in that photograph you can see
there is more to it there is structure
within the uh three separate rings
themselves
and indeed we've got the f ring labelled
on the diagram there is an extra little
thin
ringlet out beyond the a ring
the dark gap here this is the cassini
division between the a and b
rings and this is another division the n
key division
which is within the a ring
and again you can observe the enki
division with an amateur telescope
but when you get up close and this image
taken by
voyager when it was passing by
the planet saturn
then you can suddenly see that within
every one of those rings it is made of
hundreds and hundreds of these small
ringlets
with little tiny gaps between them like
the grooves in an old record
and above and below the ring plane
sort of hovering over the top of it are
these
dust clouds that rotate around at a
different speed to the rest of it
and often are particles of dust moving
on much more elliptical orbits
voyager also discovered that some of the
rings and ringlets
are kept in check by
what's called shepherd moons these are
tiny little moonlets
perhaps 10 kilometers across that we're
not known about
until voyager visited saturn and
these orbit in pairs often
one inside and one outside a ring
and it's the combined gravitational
interactions between these two little
moons
and the ring particles that keeps the
ring particles herded together
so like sheep dogs herding sheep
and also is what's responsible for these
spokes that you can see
these are gravitational disturbances
uh caused by the presence of these two
moons
and some of those moons can interact
with each other gravitationally so they
end up swapping orbits as well
there are prometheus and janus very
famously two of the shepard moons
where they catch up with each other
and when they do so the gravitational
interaction between them
slows down the faster moving one and
speeds up the slower moving one and they
end up swapping orbits
and go around saturn again
many times until they meet each other
again and then swap
back in a weird repeating dance
now this is a picture of the little moon
enceladus that
orbits around saturn and
for the fantastic image here fret taken
by cassini
of enceladus up close enough to see the
craters on the northern side here
and this southern half covered in an icy
layer with these stripes called the
tiger stripes
i'm not quite sure why they're called
tiger stripes because they're blue
and last time i checked tigers weren't
blue but uh
they're called the tiger stripes
nevertheless and these are an ice
covering over a liquid water ocean at
least covering
half of the surface of
enceladus and it's out gassing
water vapor out through the tiger
stripes
they managed to get it in silhouette
here with the sun behind
you can see the outgassing and the same
is occurring in this
color photograph they've even flew the
probe
through the uh jets of material
and attempted some chemical analysis
which the probe wasn't really set up for
but it did show that there was water
there was native hydrogen
h2 and there was also traces of organic
material there so
very interesting from the point of view
of the source of these
organics mixed with hydrogen these are
the sorts of uh
things that might be a bio signature of
some sort of
living bacteria or something underneath
in the warm ocean
underneath that ice cap there but this
is a photograph
of a wide field photograph of enceladus
orbiting around saturn
here it is and it's created its own ring
this is the e ring e for enceladus um
that is a diffuse ring around saturn
caused by the outgassing of all this
material
that then ends up in the same orbit as
enceladus
what uh making its own way around saturn
and has completed
the formation of a new ring so that's
one
possible source of ring material is
that it's matter that has been
lost to space out gassed from the moons
but that's not really the primary cause
of quite such spectacular rings around
saturn
that comes down to a process of
what is technically called
spaghettification uh
if you come too close to a large
gravitating object like a giant planet
then
the material that you are made of
can be weak enough for you to be torn to
pieces
by the gravity and that's illustrated in
this
stop-motion set of pictures here
some body perhaps a comet nucleus
comes close towards the main planet
and the white line is called the roche
limit
which is the position at which if you
approach beyond this
the gravity it induces sufficient stress
in an incoming object to tear it apart
so but to begin with it it becomes
stretched and elongated towards the
planet
and as it crosses this roche limit it is
disrupted and falls apart
and then the resulting uh separation of
all of the
elements results in lots of smaller
bodies
orbiting around in a ring now
the roche limit is a movable limit
it depends on the size of the incoming
object
and its relative degree of
uh strength of how well it's put
together
so comets being sort of loose
agglomerations of dirty snowballs
aren't very strong at all and so they
encounter this limit
at a greater distance than a much more
solid object would
and it's thought that it's the
disruption of comets like this that
has caused this uh
tearing apart and forming of the uh the
rings of
things like saturn we've seen that
happen
we saw it happen to comet schumacher
levy 9
when it approached the planet jupiter
and
in fact it was caught in the aftermath
having been
spaghettified and torn into about 27
separate little cometlets little tiny
fractions
on the previous pass of jupiter and then
on the next pass the orbit had also been
changed such that it impacted with
jupiter
and these dirty markings here are the
impact scars
in jupiter's atmosphere of all of these
individual
pieces of spaghettified comet that were
crashing one after another
into the uh intense atmosphere of
jupiter
and causing a very large amount of
energy to be dumped
as an explosion leading to these dirty
stains in the in the uh gas
they lasted for a week or so before they
faded back to normal
jupiter then just carried on as if
nothing had happened
and indeed jupiter does have its own set
of rings
it's not just saturn that has rings and
this is a lovely couple of images
backlit uh seeing these lights scattered
forward by
the ring particles so it's a very good
way of observing the um
faint rings we didn't know about these
until
spacecraft first visited jupiter and
then they were discovered via this
back illumination technique and
this is a schematic diagram of them
with some of jupiter's inner moons
marked here
so moon io would be out here somewhere
outside of the uh zone of the rings
they're really
in closer to the planet than the main
satellites
but some of these like amalfia which is
the fifth largest
moon of jupiter actually orbit through
the ring structure
and again are potentially acting like
shepherd moons
between them to control the position of
all of the other
material there
so let's just have a little uh schematic
look about
this business about uh spaghettification
and good old newton's law of gravity
here just uh
we should all try and remember this one
false equals
newton's constant g which tells us how
strong gravity
is times the product of the two masses
of the objects divided by the square of
the distance between them
and so you can sort of have an object
approaching a larger
one within about 10 000 kilometers you
can plug in the numbers
and find out what force it's suffering
and the force
is accelerating the object towards the
planet
that's fine but it's actually the case
that the force
on the near side is going to be slightly
stronger than the force on the far
side because the far side is a little
bit further away
and this is the same effect that is
responsible for
to some degree the tides on the earth
and you get the tidal stretching
because the force is inversely
proportional to the square of the
distance
um you get this effect and this is the
real explanation of
uh what happens with tidal stretch
you get a bulge in both sides of
the oceans of the earth or indeed
of the molten rock of the inner core of
the earth but to a lesser extent
and this sort of points generally in the
direction of in earth's case the moon
or whatever it is the body that's coming
coming in
towards you so you get it stretched out
at the equatorial regions but you get
squeezed
in at the poles as well which is uh
often
not what people quite understand and the
reason for this is
that the force on up on a particle of
water
say here is actually directed straight
towards
the satellite on the diagonal not
straight out towards it as it would be
if it was at the equator
and if you take the uh force
going on this diagonal you can split it
into two component parts
one parallel to the outward direction
and one down to make up this overall
diagonal effect
and the same is true in the southern
hemisphere but it's going
up and so water near the poles
is partly forced this way towards
the same direction that everything else
is going but it's also forced
down towards the equator or up towards
the equator depending on whether it's
starting from
the north or the south and it is that
downward motion or upward motion
the polar motion towards the equator
that creates these equatorial bulges
more than anything else
and so you can plug in the numbers and
work out the tidal tension
that uh is created by all of this and
the difference in the
force between the near side and the far
side of a body when it's coming in
and uh i won't bother bore you with all
of the maths
but there's another page full of it you
can reduce all of this down
and you end up with the
this equation at the end here once
you've made a appropriate level of
approximations which tells you that that
the tidal tension inside the body
the difference between the the near
force and the fire force
is four r over r cubed so it
depends on the cube of the distance from
the
main planet and on the size of the
object
that's coming in size on the object
coming in
offsets to some extent against the
cube of the distance so you can work all
of that out and when that force
exceeds the strength of whatever
material you're made of
then you've hit the roche limit and bits
of you start getting torn apart
that results in smaller objects and then
because this the objects themselves are
smaller
this little r is is reduced and so
those little objects are then stable
until they come
even closer in and so what happens is
that the big object is torn into a few
large
chunks and they continue to approach
inwards
and then those smaller chunks are
themselves
subdivided again as each progressively
crosses its own rush limit
and so in three dimensions you have
a rosh surface around a pair of objects
this might be
a planet and its moon or a nearing comet
or a binary star
and if you are within the rush limit
of this star you'll get torn apart by
its gravity if you're inside
this area you'll get torn about part by
this one
and then there are the lagrange points
which are the points of equal
amounts of gravity so the point of
balance between the two
is a is an equi point of the
gravitational field
but it turns out that there are other
zero points as well
there are five of them in such a system
and so the you get these weird roche
lobes
and it's for this reason that material
outgassing from a
red giant star say here will cross over
out of its zone of control out of its
lobe
and if it crosses into the lobe of
control of
the companion star then it'll fall in
onto it
so we'll go back to saturn again and
this lovely shot here
of uh again the backlit rings of saturn
so you've got the
a b and c rings in here i think this is
the a
ring the b ring and the c ring looking
very different
due to the forward scattering this is
the f ring that we
saw in that earlier photograph and this
out here this is the e
ring caused by enceladus much more
diffuse
ring but there are even larger rings
than that
one of them is caused by the moon
phoebe it has a diffuse ring
associated with it this is a picture of
the moon
phoebe here and it's orbiting quite a
lot further
away from saturn um the rest of what we
were looking at is
deeply buried right in the middle here
and then we've got another moon iapetus
that's
uh in between the two so three and a
half million kilometers out is our
apertures
12.9 to phoebe but this is the outermost
known ring of saturn it's absolutely
vast
but when you look at phoebe you look at
it and you see the structure of it it's
a little bit irregular
it's covered in vents and we think
that this is the nucleus of a captured
comet and so a comet came close enough
to saturn to become captured and then
the tail of the comet
and the outgassing from the nucleus
has formed this diffuse ring around the
planet
so in that case we're pretty sure that
phoebe has uh
resulted in that outer ring um due to
its cometary nature
but let's have a look at that other moon
iapetus there
so it's a very curious object
and again patrick moore's books talk
about a apetus
and a strange behavior of it which is
that whenever it was seen
to the west side of saturn
it was two magnitudes brighter than when
it was seen to the eastern side
um and nobody really knew what this was
until we got the nice up-close
photographs of it from the
various visiting space probes and what
we find is that
one hemisphere of iapetus is covered in
bright
frosty material and the other is very
very dark
and this happens because the apotus is
in tidal lock
with saturn so it always keeps one face
towards it
as the moon does with the earth and then
the leading face pointing in the
direction that the apetus is orbiting
is the white face of it which is picking
up
material falling in from that phoebe
ring inwards towards saturn
gradually gravitating in and snowing out
as iapetus sweeps through the material
and picks it up on its leading
edge but the trailing surface
is not picking any material up and is
very very dark indeed
so we can see the the two of them
together here
and we can also see a very interesting
feature which is this ridge around the
equator
of the apertus it almost looks like
somebody cut the whole moon in half
and then tried to sort of weld it back
together and
you can see the weld line along the
middle or as if it's made of two halves
of coconuts that have been sort of
pushed back together
and this ridge around the center is a
bit of a mystery
we've got a better photograph of it from
voyager which uh
took a really good uh image of it so you
can see how it's
this ridge of mountains running right
around the equator
and people are still argue arguing about
what's caused it
whether it's a a geological uh feature
of the moon's shrinking or whether it's
uh
some sort of long fault line right round
the middle
and uh the result of volcanic activity
but another
intriguing uh possibility is that it's
material that has fallen out of orbit
and landed and piled up along the
equator
you'll have noticed that the rings of
saturn and the rings of jupiter orbit
around the equatorial plane
that again is a consequence of the tidal
effect
that created the rings in the first
place by disruption
and the effect of the tides on the earth
as i said is to
pull the water from the poles to the
equatorial layer
well the same thing happens with
interactions between
the ring particles and the other moons
of saturn
they pull the ring particles into an
equatorial
orientation right around the middle of
saturn
in the same plane as the majority of the
moon's orbit around it
it's that same effect now here this
could be that the apatus itself
had acquired enough material under its
own local gravity bearing in mind it's
quite a way out from saturn so it could
probably
do that without the material just being
dragged straight
or in towards saturn to have had its own
ring
around it and that this ridge is the
fossilized remains of the rings of the
apetus
that have spiraled down and then landed
along the
equator um
it's also covered in these weird dark
pits as well
which again nobody has quite managed to
explain
and these may be pointing more towards
that volcanic explanation
but i think the ring theory is probably
right and the evidence for it is
the small moon of saturn called pan
this is one of the shepherd moons that's
organizing the
enki division in the a ring it's a
one of the innermost known moons a moon
lut is probably a better description
it's quite tiny
and uh it has this uh equatorial
uh flange around it so it's a much more
pronounced
version of the epitous ridge and it's
got some waves in it as well
and we think that this is ring material
that has then been swept up
and deposited into this equatorial
uh ridge of extreme proportions
there's another photograph of pan here
side on it looks like it's floating
in the rings but actually face on here
it is
uh looking down on it or orbiting in the
gap
but it's right in that ring plane and
the the ridge around its middle
is lined up with the rings and it's also
followed around by lots of other bits of
material that sit at the relative
lagrange points
between it and saturn 60 degrees ahead
60 degrees behind it in orbit
um but if you think pan is rather
peculiar well it's not the only one
here's
atlas that orbits just outside the a
ring
so in a slightly wider orbit than pan
and it's got an even more pronounced
equatorial ridge the whole thing looks
like a
pair of fried eggs that have been
slapped together
with almost no body and a large amount
of white going around it here
quite incredible so uh i think these are
fossilized rings
now here's ria this is the second
largest moon of saturn titan is the
largest
and is larger than the planet mercury
even it's uh three and a half thousand
kilometers across
ria is 1500 kilometers across which uh
is quite sizeable for a moon but it's
it's smaller than
the earth's moon nevertheless um
and it has a possible ring system
of its own uh not one that's collapsed
onto the surface
but uh it's been detected
now just a couple of other facts it has
its own atmosphere as well so it's
sort of verging on planet hood in in
many just many ways apart from the fact
that it's in orbit around saturn
and the uh temperature minus 174 degrees
c is warmed slightly by this thin
atmosphere relative to what it would be
at that distance from the sun
but i said it has rings these were
detected because
rear passed in front of
a passing star creating an occultation
blotting out the light from the star
as the star went into eclipse behind the
moon
but as it did so the light
dropped but it didn't drop uniformly
but this is the light curve of it
dropping and
being completely blotted out and then
coming back again
and you can see some of the light seem
to
sneak in this is the diameter of this
the satellite
and this is what we would have expected
this is some of the light being
diffracted through the thin atmosphere
of ria
a bit like sunset but out here we've got
some further drops in the light
curve which was the star going past
and being partially obscured by sets of
rings that are orbiting around
rear itself so saturn has rings and it
has
moons and some of the moons have rings
and
i think that's uh quite a incredible
sort of uh
chain of events to uncover really
now if we move a bit further out in the
solar system
we have the planet uranus and again
spacecraft revealed
that that too has rings
but uranus is tipped over on its side
relative to its orbit
so it orbits round in the same plane of
the ecliptic that the other planets do
but its rotation axis is tipped at 89
degrees to that
so at some occasions it rolls along its
orbit
but nevertheless around its equator it
has
a set of rings and so at the moment
one of the poles of uranus is pointing
almost straight towards the earth
and so the rings are completely exposed
to our gaze um they're too faint for us
amateur astronomers to be able to see
but when it does pass in front of
distant stars
again you get a great opportunity to
make those measurements
armed with the hubble space telescope
however you can see them
and this is showing the orientation over
a series of years
as uranus's spin axis
is pointing at right angles to the plane
of the rings
but because of that tip over as it
orbits round
the presentation to us here on earth
changes quite considerably so in 2007
the rings were edge on to us and the
poles were pointing along the direction
of
saturn's orbit now they're
in 2021 they're pointing straight at us
again
and the rings are fully exposed
and that here again is some image of the
detail within
uranus rings taken by the
voyager 2 spacecraft and some star
trails from behind
going being obscured by them
voyager 2 also went to neptune and it
won't surprise you at all
to learn that we discovered that neptune
2 has rings
i love this photograph it's one of my
favorites of the great dark spot on
neptune
and some of the wispy white clouds with
the amazing blue
color caused by methane gas but here we
have
neptune and to scale its rings
around it originally voyager thought
they were
partial rings ring arcs but it now seems
that they do go all the way around
and you can see there's several of them
there's even a fainter one in here
so it seems that all the giant planets
have rings
but they're not limited to being a
property of giant planets
because when there's enough material
flying around like at saturn
we've certainly discovered at least one
moon that has
its own set of rings and others that
have had them in the past and had them
settle out onto the surface
what about other objects in the solar
system then
well here's one that you might not have
heard of
this is object cowell discovered in 1979
by charles cowell tiny little speck
of uh space rock 180 kilometers in
diameter so
not that tiny it's uh but it's uh
certainly sort of asteroid sized rather
than planet
sized but it had a very curious orbit
the observations of it sometimes
showing that it had a tail like a comet
what also showed that it was orbiting in
the outer solar system
uh between the outer planets where
nothing
prior to this had been found and
due to that half asteroid half
comet nature they classified it as a
centaur from the
the half man half horse creatures of
mythology
and so it's the lead object of this new
class of uh
celestial body called centaurs this is
where it's orbiting
and its orbit seems to be under control
of
two giant planets and this is a feature
that is common to all of the centurs
it's got a uranus's orbit uh
near miss here and then it crosses
inside the orbit of saturn
and comes back out again and so it won't
be
stable in the long run because
eventually it's going to have a nasty
accident there'll be a train wreck
where it comes too close to one or other
of those
two giant planets and it'll either get
slung out of the solar system or slung
into a new
orbit further in in the solar system or
captured as another moon
or if it comes into too close to contact
with either of them
maybe it'll get torn apart and
form more material to add to the rings
that already exist
but in 2015 a pipe paper was published
that has identified the fact that chiron
itself
has its own ring system so this is the
first
uh separate body outside of the realm of
the giant planets to be identified
with its own rings around it and this is
not a photograph i wish it was
but this is an artist's impression of
the rings of chiron
in 1997 so 20 years later then
another of these objects was discovered
czech urillo and this orbits also
around the outer part of the solar
system and
interacts with uranus with a very close
grazing pass as shown in the little
animation here
pert the purple one is uh chakarillo
and it's going to graze uranus's orbit
out at the extreme
end there and then dives back in again
and crosses saturn's orbit so
much the same trick as chiron
this is a bigger object 250 kilometers
in diameter
so a little bit larger than chiron
and guess what we have discovered in
2013 when it passed in front of
the uh another star that same sort of
winking in and out of the starlight
telling us that there is a pair of rings
around
uh the little centaur here at
396 and 405 kilometers
from it and so uh these
rings about nine kilometers wide and
uh three and a half kilometers for the
uh
outer one the lesser one so they're
quite sizable rings in their own right
so there are two of these centaurs
that have got these rings of material
around them
now that's rather curious because
they're not large enough really to
tear other objects that come too close
to them apart they don't have the
pulling power of a giant planet to have
a
a roche limit that's going to tear a
passing comet apart
so maybe they just they must have been a
collision
between these objects and something else
that's blown some material out
into a loose orbit around them so they
may have a slightly different origin for
these rings
and this is just an artist's impression
of what those rings might look like if
you were to stand on czecharillo
um there are two other centaurs that are
even bigger than this
uh there's they're new enough that they
haven't got names they're called 2014
and w65
which we're still in contact with and is
just a little bit bigger
and then the largest one at 300
kilometers
is 1995 sn 55
wandering the outer solar system but
we've lost it
we lost track of it failed to keep up
the observations
and its orbit is uh drifted
by interaction with a giant planet
perhaps or something
and we've lost track of it so it's out
there
gone rogue we don't know where it is
which is a little bit scary for
something weighing 300 kilometers
that's a a big object to be on the loose
in the solar system
now if we go out into the realm beyond
pluto
into the kuiper belt we find juane
and huame is a very strange object
indeed
it's the shape of a rugby ball very
elongated
and we can tell that from its uh light
curve and because it's also done
the trick of passing in front of some uh
distant stars a number of times
it's also got a very dark face on its
sort of dark spot a bit in the same way
perhaps
uh that we had with the apotus with a
bright side and a dark side
and it's been recently discovered to
have a ring in addition to the fact it's
already
got two known moons so this little body
only 170 kilometers by 70 so smaller
than those
centaurs in the outer kuiper belt here
has uh got quite a complex uh setup
with multiple moons and its own set of
rings
so it seems that rings are incredibly
common rather than just being something
unique to saturn
so what if we go a bit further out and
by a bit further out i mean
384 light years away to
the star that goes by the exciting name
of
hip for hipparcos catalogue 41 378
and this star is a
star a little bit uh heavier than the
sun it's 115
the mass of the sun and has a
temperature of
6250 kelvin so it's about 500 degrees
hotter
that makes it an f-type star and uh
getting on for being a sort of yellowy
white color
but it's been determined by uh two
different methods that it has some
planets
has at least five and possibly seven
now five of them have been confirmed
by the radial velocity method of
measuring the doppler shift
of the star caused by the orbit of these
planets
as the planets orbit the star well
really they orbit their common center of
mass
so the star moves to and fro a little
bit
and we've detected that wobble and
deciphered it into
five separate planets from
twice the mass of the earth up to about
12 times the mass of the earth
and one of them planet number f so
the fifth one to be discovered because
they go bcd
in order of discovery is in orbit
at 1.37 astronomical units
from this star so 37
further away from its star than we are
from the sun
but the star is 500 degrees c
hotter so about 10 percent hotter the
result is
that it's right in the habitable region
and so definitely a planet of interest
but it's a very curious planet because
we're very fortunate with this star
system that
the planet the planets are not only
giving
enough of a wobble to be detected
they're also
orbiting in the plane that is the line
of sight from earth
and so we've been able to observe them
by the transit method as well
seeing them dimming the starlight now
the combination of those two means we
can
very confidently work out the mass from
the wobble
and knowing the direction of the orbit
we can precisely measure the mass of
these planets
and from the amount of light lost when
they pass in front of their parent
star and blot some of these out we can
estimate their
diameters and so what we find for planet
f
is that it's got 12 times the mass of
the earth
so that's really quite big and heavy uh
it's
i think neptune is 16 times the mass of
the earth so
it's a slightly smaller than neptune
but much larger than the earth in terms
of weight
but when we work out the radius
the radius comes out as nine times
the radius of the earth based on the
light dimming
from the transit method now if you
work that out if an object is nine times
the
radius then it has nine times nine times
nine
times the volume so that's 243 times the
volume
yet it's only 12 times the mass
so if you work out the density 12 over
243 is about 1 over 20
so it's a twentieth of the density of
the earth
that means it's a quarter the density of
water
and earth is about five grams per cubic
centimeter
water is one so this would be 0.25
grams per cubic centimeter and that
seems
extremely implausible for a planet
not sure what on earth it could be made
of
um that would be that density and yet
stable at a temperature in the habitable
zone of an f-type star
with all the heat coming from it it if
it was a very very light material like
uh
liquid hydrogen or something it would
just boil away
um and so we can't work out what it
could possibly be made of
so the conclusion is that actually this
planet has
a giant ring system around it and
is a modest sized planet itself
in line with the mass of 12 times the
mass of the earth
but has a very thick set of rings
stretching out to uh nine earth radii
that are responsible for blocking the
light from the star and giving this
apparent
much larger radius it's the radius of
the ring system that we're measuring
effectively so we've discovered a planet
with
an amazing set of rings all that
distance away 384 light years away
a little bit nearer to home though
proxima centauri has a couple of planets
proxima is a red dwarf just 4.24 light
years from the earth
and has a planet b
in the habitable zone and further out in
a five year long orbit
it has proxima c discovered in 2020
seven earth masses and again five year
orbit
quite chilly because even at this
distance
from a red dwarf there's not very much
heat getting to it
but it's been directly imaged as well as
being detected by the usual
planet detecting methods and the direct
image is too bright
compared to that mass again
and suggests that this has its own ring
system around it
and so again we're finding these ring
systems
to be extremely common all over the
place
which is a huge change uh from them
being a
freak rarity that was always the case
when we thought that saturn was the only
system so a possible ring system
around proxima centauri c
of course we've also detected dust
strings
around stars and this is the star former
hull which you can sometimes see
low in the south at the right time of
year uh
from cambridge and it's been
obscured by a piece of metal in the
optical train here blotting the star out
in the middle
they've marked where the star would be
here but this
is the obscuring disc uh of the
coronagraph as it's called that's
blotting the direct starlight out
and revealing the dust disc around the
outside
and they got very excited about this a
number of years ago because
in this dust ring they detected a
bright moving object that moved from
here to here
2004 to 2006
and was thought to be a planet
in the making uh eating the dust and
growing
and thus confirming the whole process
but uh very recently the photograph's
been repeated
in 2020 and it's gone the planet has
disappeared
and so whatever was getting together and
trying to grow into a planet
has probably had some sort of terminal
collision
and been entirely disrupted so
fascinating piece of news
and finally of course the other place we
find disks
really is in the situation where you
have
a black hole and material is spiraling
in
to be consumed by the black hole and
some of it scattered out along the jets
as shown in this artist's impression
and the discs here
get moved to accelerated to very high
speeds
get very hot due to the friction between
the different layers of the discs
and glow violently in uh high energy
radiation x-rays and even gamma rays
from some of the
most uh extreme examples and so these
again are the result of
that roche limit around the black hole
tearing things apart uh and creating the
ring system
that then is unable to maintain its
uh its orbit around the black hole and
spirals inwards
uh to be consumed by it and just there
we've
got a photograph of a real accretion
disk
taken this with the uh so-called event
horizon telescope
which was a hookup of all of the large
radio telescopes across the whole world
and took this image of the accretion
disk around the supermassive black hole
in m87 the giant elliptical galaxy
in the center of the virgo cluster 57
million light years away stuff